"Profiler" technical term page. (#4120)
great-expectations/great_expectations: docs/terms/profiler.md

---
id: profiler
title: Profiler
hoverText: Generates Metrics and candidate Expectations from data.
---
import UniversalMap from '/docs/images/universal_map/_universal_map.mdx';
import TechnicalTag from '../term_tags/_tag.mdx';
import CreateHeader from '/docs/images/universal_map/_um_create_header.mdx';

<UniversalMap setup='inactive' connect='inactive' create='active' validate='inactive'/> 

## Overview

### Definition

A Profiler generates <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="metric" text="Metrics" /> and candidate <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="expectation" text="Expectations" /> from data.

### Features and promises

> A Profiler makes it possible to quickly create a starting point for generating Expectations about a dataset. For example, during the [Getting Started Tutorial](../tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview.md), Great Expectations uses the `UserConfigurableProfiler` to demonstrate important features of Expectations by creating and validating an <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="expectation_suite" text="Expectation Suite" /> that has several kinds of Expectations built from a small sample of data. A Profiler is also critical to generating the Expectation Suites used during profiling.

Reviewer: The last sentence seems tautological, so I suggest removing it, but I might be missing the intended meaning.

```suggestion
A Profiler creates a starting point for quickly generating Expectations. For example, during the [Getting Started Tutorial](../tutorials/getting_started/tutorial_overview.md), Great Expectations uses the `UserConfigurableProfiler` to demonstrate important features of Expectations by creating and validating an <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="expectation_suite" text="Expectation Suite" /> that has several kinds of Expectations built from a small sample of data. 
```

There are several Profilers included with Great Expectations; conceptually, each Profiler is a checklist of questions which will generate an Expectation Suite when asked of a Batch of data.

### Relationship to other objects

> A Profiler builds an Expectation Suite from one or more Data Assets. It usually also <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="validation" text="Validates" /> the data against the newly-generated Expectation Suite to return a <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="validation_result" text="Validation Result" />.

Reviewer: I don't think that Profilers themselves Validate, but many Profiler workflows will include a Validation step at the end.

Author: I added that clarification.

## Use cases

<CreateHeader/>

Profilers come into use when it is time to create Expectations for your project.  At this point in your workflow you can create a new Profiler, or use an existing one to generate Expectations from a <TechnicalTag relative="../" tag="batch" text="Batch" /> of data.

> For details on how to create a customized Profiler, see our guide on [how to create a new expectation suite using rule based Profilers](../guides/expectations/advanced/how_to_create_a_new_expectation_suite_using_rule_based_profilers.md).

Reviewer: I think of the word "create" as actually writing the code for a new class of Profilers. I think you might want "configure" here.

I don't think it makes sense to have both of these links here - they are basically the same use case right now.

Author: The difference between the two is that the guide involving rule based profilers includes a sizable section on how to configure them, while the guide for creating and editing Expectations with a Profiler talks about customizing a `UserConfigurableProfiler` through input parameters.  That part of the workflow seemed significant enough to me to merit inclusion.

For instructions on how to use a Profiler to generate Expectations from data, see our guide on [how to create and edit Expectations with a Profiler](../guides/expectations/how_to_create_and_edit_expectations_with_a_profiler.md).

## Features

### Multiple types of Profilers available

There are multiple types of Profilers built in to Great Expectations.  Below is a list with overviews of each one.  For more information, you can view their docstrings and source code in the `great_expectations\profile` [folder on our GitHub](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations/tree/develop/great_expectations/profile).

#### UserConfigurableProfiler

> The `UserConfigurableProfiler` is used to build an Expectation Suite from a Dataset. The Expectations built are strict - they can be used to determine whether two tables are the same.

Reviewer 2: Would it be possible to flesh out this section a bit more? It seems to end a bit abruptly

Author: I've fleshed this section out a bit more.

> The `UserConfigurableProfiler` is used to build an Expectation Suite from a Dataset. The Expectations built are strict - they can be used to determine whether two tables are the same.

Reviewer: Capital D Dataset was a V2 entity, lowercase is a bit clearer.

```suggestion
The `UserConfigurableProfiler` is used to build an Expectation Suite from a dataset. The Expectations built are strict - they can be used to determine whether two tables are the same.
```

Reviewer: I wouldn't say "they can be used to determine whether two tables are the same." - this is too strong. We've said things in the past that it can be used as a proxy for identicality. As Will mentions, it might make sense to flesh this out and explain that in order to make this determination, you profile on dataset, then validate another.

#### BasicSuiteBuilderProfiler

The `BasicSuiteBuilderProfiler` is an extension of the `BasicDatasetProfiler` that creates a set of coarse Expectations for the profiled dataset.  Configuration of this Profiler is optional; if no configuration is provided, this Profiler will create Expectations for every column in the dataset.  

The values in Expectations created by the `BasicSuiteBuilderProfiler` are extremely coarse and do not correspond to the actual values in the profiled data.  Rather, the purpose of this Profiler is to generate a broad range of candidate Expectations for the profiled data, which you can then prune down to those Expectations you find relevant and edit with values based on domain knowledge.  You will definitely want to edit the values used in Expectations created by this Profiler! 

#### ColumnsExistProfiler

The `ColumnsExistProfiler` is an extension of the `BasicDatasetProfiler` that additionally adds an Expectation that each column found in the profiled dataset exists in the source data system. 

#### JsonSchemaProfiler

> The `JsonSchemaProfiler` creates Expectation Suites from JSONSchema artifacts. Basic suites can be created from these specifications.

Reviewer: Most of these are near deprecation if not fully deprecated. I think all of them would not work for V3, aside from the `JsonSchemaProfiler` which (I think) is V2/V3 agnostic.

Rule Based Profilers should probably also be in this list.

Author: I removed the sections for those profilers other than the `JsonSchemaProfiler` since that seemed to be a use case the others wouldn't cover.  I also added a section for Rule Based Profilers, and merged the content for the Extendable to account for domain knowledge into it.

:::note
- There is not yet a notion of nested data types in Great Expectations so suites generated by a `JsonSchemaProfiler` use column map expectations.
- A `JsonSchemaProfiler` does not traverse nested schemas and requires a top level object of type `object`.
:::

For an example of how to use the `JsonSchemaProfiler`, see our guide on [how to create a new Expectation Suite by profiling from a JsonSchema file](../guides/expectations/advanced/how_to_create_a_new_expectation_suite_by_profiling_from_a_jsonschema_file.md).

> ### Extendable to account for domain knowledge

Reviewer: This is something that afaik is exclusive to Rule Based Profilers. You could technically subclass anything else and do anything, but there is a direct path to doing this with RBPs.

Author: I've merged this content into the section I added about Rule Based Profilers.

You can also extend Profilers to capture organizational knowledge about your data. For example, a team might have a convention that all columns **named** "id" are primary keys, whereas all columns ending with the **suffix** "_id" are foreign keys. In that case, when the team using Great Expectations first encounters a new dataset that followed the convention, a Profiler could use that knowledge to add an `expect_column_values_to_be_unique` Expectation to the "id" column (but not, for example an "address_id" column).

## API basics

> ### How to access

Reviewer: I would expect a lot of this section to be in separate How To Guide pages. Some of the content feels a bit repetitive with existing How Tos. I'd love to better understand what content goes in which section.

Author: This section was originally part of the section on Rule Based Profilers for the Profilers core concept document (and comprised a very large chunk of that document).  I felt it was important to include mostly for the discussion about the components of a rule-based profiler, which is largely overlooked in other documents (since they are focused on showing how to repeat a process more than explaining how the Rule Based Profiler works).  It also seemed applicable since Rule-Based Profilers are heavily dependent on being configured properly, so it seemed important to include the additional explanation and context for those users who came to this page because they were having difficulty following along with an existing guide for using a Rule-Based Profiler, or because they were interested in learning more about how Rule-Based Profilers work.

- **table_expectations_only:** Boolean, default False. If True, this will only create the two table level Expectations available to this Profiler (`expect_table_columns_to_match_ordered_list` and `expect_table_row_count_to_be_between`). If a `primary_or_compound_key` is specified, it will create a uniqueness Expectation for that column as well.
- **value_set_threshold:** Takes a string from the following ordered list - "none", "one", "two", "very_few", "few", "many", "very_many", "unique". When the Profiler runs without a semantic_types dict, each column is profiled for cardinality. This threshold determines the greatest cardinality for which to add `expect_column_values_to_be_in_set`. For example, if `value_set_threshold` is set to "unique", it will add a value_set Expectation for every included column. If set to "few", it will add a value_set Expectation for columns whose cardinality is one of "one", "two", "very_few" or "few". The default value is "many". For the purposes of comparing whether two tables are identical, it might make the most sense to set this to "unique".

### How to create

> If you need to create a custom Profiler, you will be working with a Rule-Based Profiler, which is an instance of the `RuleBasedProfiler` class.

Reviewer: As above, I think that "create" is not quite the right word.

RBPs are highly configurable by themselves. You could also subclass them and make a new class of Profiler, and I would see that as "creating" whereas this is more "configuring."

Author: I updated this to note that it is unlikely the user will need to subclass a Profiler to "create" a new one, and that they should instead work with a Rule Based Profiler.
